and so i encourage all of you to accept
responsibility for your situation in
life
because if you accept responsibility for
your situation
you also have the power to control it i
know it sounds kind of weird but
if other people are to blame then i
can't do anything about it
because i can't change other people you
can try but it's not going to work
so let's kind of get started so a lot of
times people kind of assume
that you know if they're highly rational
that they're like not emotional
so we see this a lot in argument right
where people will kind of be like
oh you know this person is a is a you
know this person is getting emotional
and therefore their argument is wrong
and it's really tricky because we you
know especially like a lot of people of
our generation will think of themselves
as like rational thinkers and part of
the reason that they
conclude that they are a rational
thinker i am a rational thinker and
someone else is not
is because this person is displaying
emotion and i am not displaying emotion
so if this person displays emotion and i
am not displaying emotion then i am the
more rational thinker therefore my
argument is more correct
and it's almost like we sort of say that
the display of emotion
becomes like a point against our
rational argument like if i make a
rational argument but i make it
emotionally you know if i have an
argument but i make it emotionally then
it becomes
not rational which is kind of
interesting because
that's not really the case so i know a
lot of people think of themselves
as like very rational thinkers but if
you really like engage them in
conversation and they don't think of
themselves as emotional like you can
actually uncover a lot of emotion very
quickly
and the simplest way to tell you know
someone who thinks that they're a
rational thinker
that they're you know a simple way to
elicit emotion is to tell them that
their logic is wrong
just be like no bro like you're the
logical chain that you are outlining is
incorrect
and if you say that you will see an
emotional response
the emotion will definitely come right
right out right
so it's kind of interesting because we
sort of think about rationality and
emotionality at opposite ends of the
spectrum
and in a sense that's actually somewhat
true
and we'll get to the neuroscience in a
second but there is reciprocal
inhibition between our cortices
and our limbic system so our cortices is
where a lot of our higher order thinking
comes from
and there's there's a limbic system is
where our emotions come from and
what reciprocal inhibition means is that
our cortices will suppress our emotions
and our emotions will suppress our
cortices
so there's a reason why some people
think that you know if you're emotional
you're not going to be thinking
rationally so there's some truth to that
but that's unfortunately not entirely
how the mind works
so the first thing that we want to kind
of dig into is that skill
at argument does not necessarily make
you rational
so a lot of times i'll see this in
couples counseling where like one person
is like a better debater than the other
person
and so anytime they have a conflict like
one person
is like able to form their arguments
more like coherently and therefore they
will win the argument
and then they assume that because they
won the argument
that their logic and their rational
thinking is superior to the other
persons
it's kind of interesting right because
if i win an argument doesn't that
imply that the rationality that i used
is more correct than yours
but hold on like let's take a step back
and recognize that like debate
and skill at argument is like a skill so
if i had someone who was a master
debater
and i even like i gave them a uh a bad
premise
to argue they would be able to like even
take something illogical and
actually like out maneuver someone who
is not as good as a debate
right so one way that we sort of justify
the rationality of our
argument is if we can out argue some or
out argue someone else because
so if i can convince someone or if i can
out maneuver someone using my skill of
argument
then i must be correct but that's not
actually the case right because
skillet argument is just skillet
argument doesn't actually mean that
you're logically correct
it just means that you're better at out
maneuvering another person
and so this is kind of interesting
because you know
like just because you're able to out
maneuver someone doesn't actually make
you right but then you kind of scratch
your head and you're like but
if then what does make me right how do i
know if i'm rational if like skillet
argument doesn't mean i'm right
and so it's kind of interesting because
if you really look at it from a
neuroscience perspective
what you can actually find is that
emotions can
hijack your skill at argument okay so
let's take the
the example of like someone who's in
denial
about being addicted to alcohol so this
person
people can approach someone who's
addicted to alcohol in in denial
with the most logical argument and
emotionally
if this person is not willing to accept
that they have a problem
their rational mind will come up with
all kinds of counter arguments and you
will never be able to convince them that
they have a problem
right unless they are willing to
entertain the idea that they have a
problem you will never be able to
convince them
so it's kind of interesting because if
you really look at the mind what we find
is that your skillet argument
can be hijacked by other parts of your
mind
and so it you know you can kind of get
emotional like if you get someone who's
like very good at arguing you get them
riled up they will argue with you
that their emotion will kind of fuel
that argument and then like
they will you will never be able to
convince them that they're wrong
and they may even be able to outmaneuver
you and they will walk away from that
interaction thinking that they're right
and so people are kind of confused about
that all you have to do is look at
politics right because when i hold a
political belief
and someone else holds the opposite
political belief both of us
within our mind are convinced that our
belief
is logical and justifiable no one in
politics says
my belief is idiotic we always try to
say oh this other person isn't thinking
clearly
they're emotional and both sides will
say this all the time and if you really
like kind of like
ask the person is your you know believe
logical they'll say of course it is
that's why i believe it but if we really
get it get into it what we actually
realize is that's not the case
because logic may exist objectively but
when you take
logic and you stick it in a human brain
some weird stuff starts to happen okay
so let's try to like dig into why
rational
thinkers are actually quite emotional
and how unless you
understand the emotional aspect of your
thinking
you will never sort of be thinking
properly
okay so it starts with this so a lot of
people will say
okay i'm not feeling emotional
therefore i must be rational right and
that's kind of interesting but if you
look at it
some people are alexa thymic and so what
that means is that they're
they've actually trained themselves or
been conditioned
to turn down the volume on their
emotional signals
if you actually look at these people
their eq or emotional quotient
is like lower than other people who are
not a
alexa thymic and so i know it sounds
kind of weird but just because you don't
feel emotion doesn't mean that there
isn't emotion that's active in your
brain
so we all have this part of our brain
called the limbic system and the limbic
system is how we feel emotion
and i know it sounds kind of bizarre but
you can even look at
you know cases of people and we'll we'll
show some papers quickly
but you can look at people who have you
know neuroscience things going on
that suppress their ability to feel
emotion and what you actually find is
those circuits of the brain aren't
turned off
they're actually turned on in acting in
some way
although there isn't awareness that the
emotion is present
so now it's i know it sounds kind of
weird but like if you engage in a
logical argument with someone
the emotional parts of your brain are
not going to be like
non-functional they'll be functional and
some amount of awareness will be
suppressed so one of the
places that we actually see this is
actually in schizophrenia research
so if you look at people with
schizophrenia their experience
of emotion over time can be like blunted
or diminished
so people with schizophrenia can develop
something called flat affect which means
you can't
see emotion in their face so even though
they could be experiencing emotion
their the visibility of their emotion
is kind of like there's a there's a
break between these two
circuits of your brain and similarly
what we see in alexa thymia is that the
emotion is
active on some level in your
neuroscience
and is actually hijacking your
rationality but your experience of it
is not present which sounds really
really weird but that's because sort of
like
you you're just not aware of it but it's
absolutely there
okay so this is where let's kind of turn
to a little bit of research
okay so we're going to explain this
principle a little bit better
so inhibition of action thought and
emotion a selective neurobiological
review so this
this review goes into a lot of
information that is less
relevant for us but is really
interesting
talks about you know inhibitory circuits
for thoughts and actions and emotions
but here's the important part for us so
emotional dysregulation is a
characteristic
of a variety of forms of psychopathology
and dysregulated fear responses play a
prominent role in blah blah blah
by studying extinction researchers
have made substantial progress in
understanding the psychological and
neural mechanisms underlying the
inhibition
of conditioned fear responses below we
review evidence indicating that the
vm that's ventromedial prefrontal cortex
amygdala and hippocampus are critical
brain regions
involved in fear extinction okay so
let's just think a little bit about what
this is saying and i'll try to translate
for y'all
what this means if we're talking about
inhibition of a con
conditioned fear response what that
essentially means is that
i have a fear response that is
activating
but there are parts of my brain that are
kind of inhibiting it or suppressing it
so the fear is there and there are
certain circuits of my brain that will
actually like
go out of their way to try to suppress
it from actually happening
and this is sort of what we see in cases
of like a lexithymian argument
is that a lot of people won't feel
emotional
but there are actually emotional
circuits that are active that are being
inhibited from like presenting in a
particular way by other circuits of our
brain
so our ventromedial prefrontal cortex
which
is where a lot of our you know logic and
executive function comes from
actively will inhibit the experience of
things like fear or other kinds of
emotions
but the really interesting thing is that
there's reciprocal
inhibition so sometimes what can happen
is even though we're trying to inhibit
that circuit
that circuit can activate and actually
shape our rational thinking
okay and no it sounds kind of weird but
if you have a friend who's very
emotional let's say that i'm afraid that
my partner is cheating on me
then what happens is that emotion drives
my rational thought process right
and then i start thinking all these
things that if my friends try to
disprove me i'm like no man
like i'm texting her and she's not
answering but it's like dude
maybe she's asleep it's like 1am no man
like she's not answering because this
right and you can try to argue with that
person as much as you want to
but as long as that emotional circuitry
is hijacking their rational circuitry
they will never like respond to your
rational argument
right and so this is kind of the tricky
thing when it comes to the human mind is
we have
rational thoughts and we have emotional
thoughts
and we tend to think that if i don't
sort of think if i don't
feel the emotion then i must be rational
but actually what what i've discovered
and this is sort of what the vedic
with the yogis discovered as well is
that if you are not
aware of your emotions if you can't feel
emotions
that doesn't mean that emotions don't
exist that just means that the action of
emotions
is not visible to you and i would argue
that the less
emotion you're able to feel the more
likely your rational thinking is
actually hijacked by your emotions
and this is where things like cognitive
biases come from right so if we think
about
these things in psychiatry like
cognitive biases
denial defense mechanisms projection
so what are what what does all this crap
mean like why does this happen
why do we have a cognitive bias why do
we have these psychological defense
mechanisms
when i am in denial that's a
psychological defense mechanism so what
am i defending against
i'm defending against emotion so we tend
to find
is that hyper rational thinkers are not
actually hyper rational
they're actually they're the at the
conclusion that they come to is i'm a
rational thinker because i don't feel
emotion
whereas what's more likely and this is
what we get trained in in psychiatry
is to recognize that there are all these
psychological defense mechanisms which
manifest as rationality but that person
is not able to experience the underlying
emotion
and if they're not able to experience it
it's essentially going to hijack
your skillet argument and start
disproving people
right and left so it's kind of bizarre
but at the end of the day
what i've seen is that if you want to
determine whether your thought process
is
truly rational or not the main question
you need to ask yourself is
am i aware of my internal emotional
state
and until you become aware of your
internal emotional state
there's a decent chance that your
thinking is not actually going to be
rational at all
but you'll be recruiting all these weird
psychological defense mechanisms
and like kind of hijacking your skill at
argument
to prove other people wrong but really
you're the one who's like
woefully incorrect it's really bizarre
but that's kind of how it works
so if you want to be become a more
rational thinker i know it sounds kind
of weird but what you actually need to
do
is gain emotional awareness right
because
we when we really think about a rational
thinker like someone who makes good
decisions
it's the person who says oh like
emotionally
i feel embarrassed going to a party
but now that i'm aware that i have that
embarrassment i can
act in spite of it and kind of do the
right thing whereas what will happen if
we're not careful
is that emotional embarrassment will be
like ah it's not worth going to
right oh i'm not even going to have a
good time oh it's so far away
i come up with all of these i know this
is a weird word i know you guys have
never heard this word before it's it's a
very rare sanskrit word
rationalizations right and what does
that mean like what is a rationalization
it's our brains emotion
hijacking our skill of argument to come
up with a logical response
that other people are not able to argue
against
right it's crazy we even have words in
our
language where we intrinsically
understand this stuff we intuitively get
this when we use the word
rationalization
and what we tend to find is that the
more unaware you are of your emotions
the more your rational thought process
will be filled with rationalizations
instead of real logic so that's how
you know you got to be careful but if
you consider yourself a rational thinker
and you don't experience much emotion
there's a decent chance and you guys may
know people who are like this too
that actually your emotions are actually
running the show from behind the scenes
and that your rational mind is a puppet
that's being controlled by your emotions
yeah people are mentioning ben shapiro
and stuff like that yeah so like i i'm
not
surprised that people are drawing these
correlations
i don't really know like i try not to
make judgments about people unless i've
talked to them personally
um but when someone is saying rational
is irrationalizing as making excuses
absolutely right so this is where
um you know
if you kind of think about it like why
are you making an excuse it's because
there's an emotional pain that you want
to dodge it's a protective mechanism
that's why we call them defense
mechanisms
so when people are kind of asking the
question okay how do i become more aware
of my emotions
so i know it's kind of weird but like if
you just actually sit down and pay
attention you may discover
that there's a lot of stuff about your
life that your
your mind is really working hard to
avoid
right because like if if we open that
can of worms if we do say
okay like this was my fault or i am an
addict
holy crap what does that mean it means
i'm letting my kids down it means i'm
letting my spouse down
it means that i'm disappointing the
people at work it means that like
i have a problem that like i don't know
if i can fix
because i you know i can fix all of the
rational things in my head
because my mind is telling me it's just
this you can fix that
but there's a lot of fear with like
letting go of your defense mechanisms
and like
you know in a raw way like facing your
problems because you
maybe you can't fix the addiction you
can fix all this other stuff which you
keep on saying is the problem no
it's not video games aren't the problem
the problem is i'm just like not
disciplined enough
i just need to be more disciplined i
wish i was more disciplined this isn't
the problem this is
it's not the marijuana that's the
problem like the marijuana helps with my
anxiety like i don't
you know the problem is that the
capitalistic society and student loans
and
and all this like the world is going to
hell it's not marijuana that's the issue
it's like
look at all of these things this is what
happens right once the emotions
hijack the rational part of our mind we
come up with a lot of evidence which is
compelling it's not like our mind thinks
false things
it's just really selective and it's like
no man like the reason that you're not
doing well in life is
absolutely because of capitalism which
is fair like it's
you can say that there's a predatory
work environment you're not logically
incorrect there
it's just blaming you know the universe
is an awesome way to give a pass
to yourself right because then it isn't
your fault
yeah like everyone else is wrong you
know and i see this a lot with like
people who are
you know i i don't want to get into this
but there there
you know there are some things that are
medically you know we know
are like medically dangerous right so
there are certain
aspects of the self and in our desire to
be like an accepting society
what what some people have started to do
is normalize or even promote
things that are like scientifically
medically dangerous and they say like oh
my god like i don't want to deal with
the shame
of a particular aspect of myself
therefore i'm going to demonize
all of society instead of like take care
of myself
right and as a scientist like is medical
doctor like there there's clear
you know there's like a clear right
answer about what's healthy and what's
unhealthy
and then what once we get into these
like psychological like
games of like i don't wanna deal with
the shame
that i feel internally therefore
i'm gonna play a really cool trick y'all
ready for it
i don't have to be ashamed if there's
nothing wrong
right so i have an op
op technique to deal with internal shame
just blame society and normalize the way
that you are
it comes back to if you don't deserve me
you don't if you can't handle me at my
worst you don't deserve me at my best
like why do i need to grow as a person
like
people need to be more accepting it's
not my problem
that i'm an [ __ ] people need to be
more compassionate
it's their problem everyone is so mean
and cruel nowadays like
i don't need to improve people need to
be nicer to me and now
everyone so be careful be careful be
careful
because now everyone's like oh like
you're
taking your particular the people that
you dislike
or you disagree with and what is your
mind doing yeah the people that disagree
with me
they're the ones that do what dr k is
talking about they're the idiots that
he's talking about
yeah that's them that's the take your
pick
conservatives liberals this person that
person take your pick
whichever side of the argument you're on
what are you doing right now
you're putting the other people that you
argue against you said dr k
that's these people no bro like you
could be that people that's what we're
saying we're not talking about the
people you argue against
we're talking about you it's crazy do
you see how your mind does that
it's so damn quick because now it has a
justification
to disprove the other person's point
it's like yeah i'm right
dr k said so be careful
okay be careful we're not here to talk
about other people
this stream is here to talk about you
right why do you take this piece of
juicy juicy evidence
because damn it's a good piece of
evidence do you guys see that scientific
paper man
oh man it's definitely this person and
it could be
you could be right right i'm not saying
that they're not like that
but just be careful about how your mind
what does your mind emotionally feel
when you assign this idiocy to your
opponents
oh my god doesn't it feel so good feels
so good
oh look at these noobs they're like this
and then look at that emotion and what
do you think that emotion is doing
it's hijacking your rational circuitry
and it's saying like oh look
now i get to feel better than them that
is my favorite thing to do
is i need to be better than that person
oh that feels so
damn good be careful be careful
okay be careful
so we're not saying and this is the key
thing to remember when your emotions
hijack your rational circuitry
your rational circuitry never comes up
with stuff that's
wrong okay this is the tricky thing
because you think oh doesn't that mean
my rational circuitry is wrong
incorrect it's selective huge difference
it's incomplete
right so if i ask a girl out girl says
no
then i feel hurt rejected and
ashamed oh my god until i start dissing
her
and it's like oh she doesn't deserve me
oh then i don't have to feel ashamed
her loss oh my god i get to feel better
about myself
i was doing it as a favor it was charity
on my part
if she doesn't want to accept the
charity
i'm too cool for her beautiful she
wasn't even that attractive
right it doesn't have to be i'm just
saying that because you know my
experience when i
you speak in the first person i adopt a
heteronormative masculine perspective
because these are the thoughts that i
had when i was like 19 years old
a freshman in college asking a girl out
and we when she turned me down
that's what my mind did came up with all
these reasons
that protected me from feeling ashamed
of myself
right it goes the other way like dudes
can do this with dudes
women can do it with dudes women can do
it with women it doesn't matter
doesn't even have to be romantic right
it can be like a job interview it can be
like uh
you can invite a friend to a social
event
and then they can turn you down and then
you feel rejected and like you're not
good enough for them and then the mind
flips over and says oh like it's his
loss
right so where i'm not trying to
demonize y'all i'm y'all are great y'all
are fantastic let's understand these
parts of ourselves
right and let's understand that it's
actually okay to feel
shame it's okay to feel rejected because
sometimes we get rejected
and as we start to look into that right
as we start to face our problems and we
face like oh wow like i really feel like
shameful
and rejected as we start to acknowledge
those emotions
then we can leverage our truly free
rational thinking on it
and then we'll discover one of two
things i know it's crazy we're gonna
discover one of two things
one is oh crap maybe i deserve to be
rejected
maybe there's something here that i need
to get better at
right like maybe like i'd do a better
job at romantic relationships and
people would say yes if i you know
groomed myself
so you that's how you make progress
right you sort of notice that there are
particular things you could do wrong
other option maybe you'll discover that
they're a toxic [ __ ]
right because some people reject you and
it's really not
fair like some people reject you because
they've got an ego thing going on
they've got emotional crap going on
maybe you'll discover that there's
someone in your life that persistently
makes you feel a negative way
and that that actually isn't fair but
you're not gonna know the answer to that
until you
authentically and calmly look at it and
face what you feel
oh wow this person routinely makes me
feel really bad about myself
so then like once you're like oh and
then it's kind of tricky i i know we're
kind of going
off on a tangent here but if you're not
careful
what that'll turn into is like all kinds
of things to make yourself feel better
when you have a toxic person in your
life and they reject you
what do you actually do to suppress that
emotion
you bend over backwards for them right
oh like this person rejected me
let me oh do you want to go out to
dinner on friday
oh you said no and i feel hurt and
rejected oh it's my treat i just got a
bonus and i'm looking to celebrate
i'll pay for your food and then the
person is like uh
okay fine and then they come out right
and then it's kind of interesting
because then what happens is you start
engaging in all of this behavior
to avoid that feeling of rejection and
propagate the toxic relationship
right it's really it's really tricky but
that's where once again the solution is
still the same as long as you're able to
notice
that shame notice that rejection be
aware of it even start to tolerate it
because
that's a big part of it not even being
aware of it awareness is like 50
intolerance to be honest and so as
you're able to do that then you're like
oh actually like i feel ashamed and
once you acknowledge the shame once you
feel the shame it's no longer
secretly working behind the scenes to
like manipulate your behavior
into propagating toxic relationships
does rationalizing
ultimately feed a negative self-image
absolutely
so remember the goal of rationalizing
is to support whatever you feel right so
if you look at like
doomers okay like
doomers actually maybe doomers is not a
good example let me think about this
so does rationalizing ultimately feed a
negative self-image
absolutely let's look at someone who's
depressed so in the mind of a depressed
person
they have a core feeling of low
self-worth
okay and then like rationally they'll
give you a thousand justifications
why there's low self-worth and you can
argue i can i can argue with my patients
there's so much reason to live like you
literally have three kids
that are telling you that they hope you
get better and they want to see you
again
and they love you very much and they
don't want you to go anywhere they're
literally telling you that
and then the stronger the emotion the
stronger the rationalization
they're just saying that they don't
understand that like i'm causing them so
much pain by being sick
they would be so much better if they
could like worry about people who
deserved their love
it's like the strength of the
rationalization supports the emotion
it's crazy right and so it absolutely
can reinforce the negative self-image
and that's why talking to people
logically about why they should live
doesn't
work very well i mean it can help some
and that's where you got to acknowledge
the emotion first then you can talk to
them logically about it
someone's asking how do you deal with a
string of toxic relationships by looking
at the common variable
i'm not trying to be mean there but like
what is it that you
do what are the emotional needs and this
is the really tricky thing
because people who wind up in strings of
toxic relationships
there's something really powerful that's
drawing you to that person
that's what you need to understand okay
it's a fantastic question
but it's this kind of thing where like i
know it sounds kind of weird but if you
look at people who are
routinely in toxic relationships
the person in the toxic relationship
makes you
feel the way makes you feel the way that
you feel about yourself
that is why people wind up in toxic
relationships over and over and over
again
they confirm what you believe about
yourself
and so human beings will go for like
confirmation and order over
pain so you will like human beings are
just wired this way it's like the way
that we've evolved
we'll accept a pain that we understand
and are familiar with because there's a
part of your mind that's like
we can survive this we've done it 10
times before
this is home field advantage and so if
you believe something about yourself and
then the toxic person
reinforces that belief it fits it's like
oh that
that's that's i knew it i knew it so
it's really tricky
but that's the problem because i mean it
could be circumstances and stuff like
that like maybe just
literally your social circle is filled
with people who are toxic
but generally speaking what i find is
that people who engage in toxic
relationships over and over and over
again i know it sounds kind of weird but
when they come into my office we don't
work on the people that they're dating
we work on them
and so i encourage all of you to accept
responsibility
for your situation in life because if
you accept responsibility for
your situation you also have the power
to control it
i know it sounds kind of weird but if
other people are to blame
then i can't do anything about it
because i can't change other people you
can try
but it's not going to work but if you
accept responsibility for your situation
that also means that
if it's your fault that you're here you
could have done things differently which
means that you can do things differently
so it's really tricky but responsibility
and empowerment come hand in hand
with great power comes great
responsibility is absolutely right
because that's the only way it works
so if you all feel if you if you're
saying to yourself it's all your fault
that also means that it's within your
power to change it
and that's just like are you willing to
carry that burden
you